Praised be Jesus and Mary, everyone.
A few years ago, I was sitting in
these pews, listening to catecheses.
Today, for the first time, I have
the opportunity to speak about Saint
Anthony, the saint of the whole world.
We are in the Basilica of Saint Anthony.
To your right are the first-class
relics of Saint Anthony.
It would be appropriate to say
something about Saint Anthony.
But before we start talking about
Saint Anthony, considering that I
manage a lot of YouTube content and
often delete inappropriate comments
or insults, I occasionally come across
comments, which I believe are from
either Protestants or perhaps Catholics
who have rejected Catholic doctrine.
They call us idolaters, claiming that we
worship idols, referring, of course, to
the saints and the Blessed Virgin Mary.
First of all, I would like
to make a distinction between
veneration and worship, because
there is a significant difference.
In the Catholic Church, we venerate
the saints, we honor the saints.
The Catechism of the Catholic Church
provides two reasons for this.
First, because we see in them an example
of how the Lord worked, how God's grace
operated, and they cooperated with God's
grace, serving as a model for us today.
And the second thing is that
they are our intercessors.
If today we can pray for one another
and believe that such prayers are
heard, imagine the power of a saint's
prayer who is with God in heaven.
As for worship, worship is
reserved only for God, the Triune
God—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
And so, that is one significant
difference if you find yourself in
a discussion, to actually understand
the difference between worship, which
is for God, and veneration of saints.
Let's get back to the topic.
Saint Anthony is a great saint.
In fact, he is called the
saint of the whole world.
And today's talk about Saint Anthony,
we can say the first image that comes to
mind when we think of Saint Anthony, or
in Dalmatia Ante, in Herzegovina Ante,
in Bosnia Anto, in Italy Antonio, the
first image of Anthony is that of keys.
I believe that everyone has lost either
keys or some item and immediately
thinks, let's pray to Saint Anthony.
Another image of Saint
Anthony is miracles.
Saint Anthony is actually
the saint of miracles.
He performed miracles during his
lifetime, and even more so today.
There are many testimonies from young
people and other believers who have come
to this Basilica, especially on the 13th.
Pilgrimages to St.
Anthony with various vows.
And they truly received
answers to their prayers.
Another image of St. Anthony is the
lilies, and you can see the basilica's
crest above, "florete quasi lilium,"
which means "bloom like lilies." If we
look at this and all these images, I
would dare to say that they are somewhat
sentimental because it is much easier
for us to relate to something simple.
And so we turn to Saint Anthony
when we need help finding keys or
for a quick prayer before an exam,
and Saint Anthony will assist.
But behind the image of Saint
Anthony lies a difficult life, a
life of suffering, we could say.
Additionally, he was a great intellectual,
a Doctor of the Church, and a profound
scholar of the Holy Scriptures.
If I were to ask you here, who
prays to Saint Anthony, I believe
everyone would raise their hand.
But if I asked how well you
know the life of Saint Anthony,
probably fewer hands would go up.
I'll briefly say something about his
life, actually about the beginning
of his life because my topic is the
calling of Saint Anthony, and we
will only touch on the early parts.
Saint Anthony was born in 1195 in
Lisbon to a wealthy noble family
and, while still young, joined the
order of the Canons Regular of St.
Augustine, or the Augustinians.
He had the opportunity to study well,
truly delving into the Holy Scriptures and
reaching an admirable level of knowledge.
But it seemed that this
was not enough for him.
Saint Anthony, while still
very young, heard about the
Franciscans, the first Franciscans
who gave their lives in Morocco.
This was, of course, in the 12th or
13th century, where they gave their
lives for Christ, going to preach to the
Saracens, the Muslims, and they died.
This inspired Saint Anthony
to follow the same path.
He left the Augustinian order and
decided to join the Franciscan order.
He had a very short formation and went
to Morocco himself to preach the gospel.
However, it didn't turn out that way
because he fell ill very quickly.
On his way back to Portugal, he
experienced a shipwreck due to a storm and
ended up in Italy, specifically in Sicily.
Here, that's a brief overview of his
life; we won't go further, but we'll
return to the first part of his life.
Saint Anthony was born
into a wealthy family.
And the first thing we can notice
is the wealth he left behind.
When we talk about wealth, it
somehow seems that in the Middle
Ages it was much simpler than today.
Today, however, it is harder
to leave behind a house we've
inherited, a nice car, or a career.
But actually, dear young
people, it's always the same.
It's never easy to leave
behind material things.
Why is that?
Because material things
give us a sense of security.
I have something to rely on,
something that protects me.
But Jesus should be our only security.
And we can go back to the Gospel and
see how the young man, the rich young
man, asks Jesus what he should do.
And Jesus tells him, if you want to be
perfect, go sell what you have and give
to the poor, and you will have treasure
in heaven, then come and follow me.
And then we also have where it says,
you cannot serve both God and wealth.
Saint Anthony, when speaking about wealth
and interpreting this passage, says
that serving wealth means rejecting God.
The problem is not in having wealth,
which is even good and permissible,
but in becoming a slave to that
wealth, which is greed itself.
We can see many examples of saints
who decided to completely devote
themselves to God, like Saint
Francis, who lived in radical poverty.
And then there's Anthony, who even
before joining the Franciscans,
by entering the Augustinian
order, also took a vow of poverty.
I'll try to explain why wealth, or
better yet, attachments, are problematic.
I assume that everyone here
wants to follow Jesus Christ.
I assume that everyone wants to follow
the Lord, as Jesus has called us.
And that you want to cooperate
with the Holy Spirit.
Because the Holy Spirit is the
one who actualizes Jesus Christ.
He makes Jesus' words, which are
recorded in the Gospel, present and
tries to bring them closer to us today.
And when we are under attachments,
let's say our life path is a journey
and we walk, walk, walk, and we receive
an inspiration, like Saint Anthony
received to go among the poor, to
preach to the Muslims, we receive an
inspiration to go in another direction.
We go straight, we get the inspiration
of the Holy Spirit to go left.
And now, we would very easily take that
step to the left if we were, say, like
Saint Francis, who had nothing behind him.
But imagine carrying on your back, I
don't know, a house you're constantly
thinking about, a car, a career, a job.
But it's not just about material
things; there are also attachments,
worries, problems, and some
people we are attached to.
And the Holy Spirit says, let's
go left, but you can't go left.
The Holy Spirit says, run, but
you can't run because you're
dragging everything with you.
I believe that when we are truly free
from everything, then you can go.
And the Holy Spirit inspires
you to go, I don't know, to
Germany, to America, to Africa.
Here I am, Lord, send me,
says the prophet Isaiah.
Let's go back to Fernando.
Fernando was the original name of
Saint Anthony, and as an Augustinian
monk, he had a very good, stable
life—something any monk would wish for.
But when he heard the news about these
martyrs, his heart couldn't rest.
He simply wasn't
satisfied with mediocrity.
We don't want to belittle
his life up to that point.
He simply realized that it wasn't enough.
God wanted something different from him.
Although he thought at that
moment that God wanted him to
go to Morocco, he directed all
his efforts towards that goal.
He had a desire for martyrdom.
When we talk about martyrs,
they have existed since the very
beginnings of the church, even today.
Let's remember the apostles,
let's remember the first
disciples like Saint Stephen.
Everyone gave their blood for Christ.
There were martyrs in our nation too, like
Blessed Aloysius Stepinac, who decided to
give himself for God and for his people.
But we also see this desire
in Saint Anthony, who wants
to go like these martyrs.
Interestingly, the word "martyrdom,"
if translated literally, means to give
testimony, to be a witness for something.
But are we witnesses today?
We are afraid to make the sign of
the cross in the cafeteria, in case
someone sees us, a friend might see
me, and then... What I mean to say
is, people gave their lives for Christ
because they realized that Christ
is love, they realized that Christ
lived for them, gave His life for us,
died for us, and resurrected for us.
And that is the strength
that carried them forward.
And that's why they weren't
afraid to give their lives.
But we, we are afraid.
Today, we've entered a sphere, a
reality where everything seems difficult
for us when it comes to Christ.
And not just for Christ, we can
talk about different callings.
Stjepan mentioned a lot in his sermon.
We have the call to marriage, the call
to religious life, the priestly call.
The call to charity, to serve others.
It has become difficult for us.
Why is that?
I don't know.
Somehow, we've become complacent,
especially we Christians in the
West, in some kind of comfort.
Everything is great, I'll come to
Holy Mass, which is truly wonderful,
I'll pray, I'll come to the Divine
Mercy, a nice sermon, catechesis, then
this adoration, I feel great, I feel
good, but is that all the Gospel is?
Is the Gospel just about me feeling good?
Of course it is, but that's not
the only aspect of the Gospel.
We Christians often forget the part
of the Gospel that says, "Take up your
cross and follow me." That part is a bit
harder for us, and we tend to forget it.
Saint Anthony and other saints
ventured into the unknown with Jesus.
We are all called to the same.
We are all called to holiness.
When we talk about Saint Anthony
and other saints, it somehow
seems that they are far away.
Their lives seem abstract to us.
It's as if we only know their legends.
But holiness is called upon by the
priest who preaches, by the first person
sitting here in the pew, by the last
person, by the doctor, the miner, the
worker, the student, the mother, the
father—everyone is called to holiness.
Saint Anthony was not special, but
do you know what his uniqueness was?
The courage, like that of all
other saints, to surrender to
the workings of God's grace.
To cooperate with God's
grace—that is holiness.
To do God's will.
And it's important that the
protagonist is the Holy Spirit, not us.
And generally speaking, Saint
Anthony, let's say, goes, wants to
go among the Saracens, the desire
for martyrdom, for missionary work.
And when we talk about the church,
the nature of the church, as
Lumen Gentium says, is that it is
missionary, it goes to meet the other.
But when we talk about missions, we
don't immediately think of Africa,
we don't immediately think of
South America or some poor areas,
or those who haven't met Christ.
We think about our everyday life,
bringing Christ wherever you are.
Where you work, where you study,
daily bringing Christ, being
a witness, being a martyr.
But when we talk about missions, we
don't immediately think of Africa,
we don't immediately think of
South America or some poor areas,
or those who haven't met Christ.
We think about our daily lives,
carrying Christ wherever you are.
Where you work, where you study,
carrying Christ daily, being
a witness, being a martyr.
The last thing we want to focus on
is the failure of Saint Anthony.
Imagine, he decided to join the
Franciscans, went through a brief
formation, and now has the opportunity.
He set off to Africa to preach his
life's dream and arrives on that
foreign land, only to fall ill.
We don't know what illness it was, but he
simply got sick and couldn't do anything.
Now, try to put yourself in the shoes of
that young man who wants to give himself
for Christ, but things didn't go his way.
And what might such a
young man be thinking?
Surely thoughts like these crossed
his mind: Did I make a mistake?
Was this just a whim?
Is this not God's will?
But again, he rose above it.
After that, he patiently endured.
He ended up in Italy
where the news spread.
But we often plan our lives the same way.
I, for one, really like to have
everything planned out, to program
my entire week, to have my own time.
It makes me feel more at ease, it's
much simpler for me to function.
But if we plan our entire lives in
advance—when I'll get married, when I'll
achieve something, when I'll finish my
studies, when I'll get a good job—then
somehow there's no room left for God.
If we want God to lead our lives,
how do we solve that problem?
What is the remedy for it?
Faith.
To let God guide us.
I trust you, my God, that it will be good.
Even though I might not see a
way out now, I believe, Jesus
Christ, that you are with me.
And truly, all the saints, all
those who surrendered themselves.
I believe that if you have found yourself
in difficult situations, if you have
let God act, let God lead you, the
light at the end of the tunnel has come.
And that faith must be
active, not passive faith.
Not the kind where you think
God is leading you so you don't
need to do anything in life.
Not that kind of faith.
Saint Anthony says, our
faith is manifested in deeds.
Anthony overcame this life's shipwreck
and after a few years, he preached.
And when you think you are completely
broken, remember, often trials
find us so difficult that they
push us into despair and breakdown.
The Creator watches over our darkness
and once again disperses rays of
light that were once withheld from us.
Then, trust and hope will return
to you, granted by Divine mercy.
Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Spirit.
Here.
We will conclude this catechesis here.
Stjepan has given us a limit.
I truly encourage you to study
the life of Saint Anthony and the
lives of other saints on your own.
Don't just rely on the legends you've
heard or some prayers, but delve into
the essence of our saint, Saint Anthony.
In the upcoming sessions, you will
be able to hear more about his life,
which you have already seen as topics.